## 5.7 Multi-dimensional Arrays

C provides rectangular multi-dimensional arrays, although in practice they are much less used than arrays of pointers. In this section, we will show some of their properties.

Consider the problem of date conversion, from day of the month to day of the year and vice versa. For example, March 1 is the 60th day of a non-leap year, and the 61st day of a leap year. Let us define two functions to do the conversions: day_of_year converts the month and day into the day of the year, and month_day converts the day of the year into the month and day. Since this latter function computes two values, the month and day arguments will be pointers:

month_day(1988, 60, &m, &d)

sets m to 2 and d to 29 (February 29th).

These functions both need the same information, a table of the number of days in each month (``thirty days hath September ...''). Since the number of days per month differs for leap years and non-leap years, it's easier to separate them into two rows of a two-dimensional array than to keep track of what happens to February during computation. The array and the functions for performing the transformations are as follows:

```
static char daytab[2][13] = {
{0, 31, 28, 31, 30, 31, 30, 31, 31, 30, 31, 30, 31}, {0, 31, 29, 31, 30, 31, 30, 31, 31, 30, 31, 30, 31}
};

/* day_of_year: set day of year from month & day */
int day_of_year(int year, int month, int day)

{
int i, leap;

leap = year%4 == 0 && year%100 != 0 || year%400 == 0; for (i = 1; i < month; i++)
day += daytab[leap][i];

return day;
}

/* month_day: set month, day from day of year */
void month_day(int year, int yearday, int *pmonth, int *pday)

{
int i, leap;

leap = year%4 == 0 && year%100 != 0 || year%400 == 0; for (i = 1; yearday > daytab[leap][i]; i++)
yearday -= daytab[leap][i];
*pmonth = i;
*pday = yearday;
}
```

Recall that the arithmetic value of a logical expression, such as the one for leap, is either zero (false) or one (true), so it can be used as a subscript of the array daytab.

The array daytab has to be external to both day_of_year and month_day, so they can both use it. We made it char to illustrate a legitimate use of char for storing small non-character integers.

daytab is the first two-dimensional array we have dealt with. In C, a two-dimensional array is really a one-dimensional array, each of whose elements is an array. Hence subscripts are written as

daytab[i][j] /* [row][col] */ rather than

daytab[i,j] /* WRONG */

Other than this notational distinction, a two-dimensional array can be treated in much the same way as in other languages. Elements are stored by rows, so the rightmost subscript, or column, varies fastest as elements are accessed in storage order.

An array is initialized by a list of initializers in braces; each row of a two-dimensional array is initialized by a corresponding sub-list. We started the array daytab with a column of zero so that month numbers can run from the natural 1 to 12 instead of 0 to 11. Since space is not at a premium here, this is clearer than adjusting the indices.

If a two-dimensional array is to be passed to a function, the parameter declaration in the function must include the number of columns; the number of rows is irrelevant, since what is passed is, as before, a pointer to an array of rows, where each row is an array of 13 ints. In this particular case, it is a pointer to objects that are arrays of 13 ints. Thus if the array daytab is to be passed to a function f, the declaration of f would be:

f(int daytab[2][13]) { ... }

It could also be

f(int daytab[][13]) { ... }

since the number of rows is irrelevant, or it could be

f(int (*daytab)[13]) { ... }

which says that the parameter is a pointer to an array of 13 integers. The parentheses are necessary since brackets [] have higher precedence than *. Without parentheses, the declaration

int *daytab[13]

is an array of 13 pointers to integers. More generally, only the first dimension (subscript) of an array is free; all the others have to be specified.

Section 5.12 has a further discussion of complicated declarations.

Exercise 5-8. There is no error checking in day_of_year or month_day. Remedy this defect.

## 5.8 Initialization of Pointer Arrays

Consider the problem of writing a function month_name(n), which returns a pointer to a character string containing the name of the n-th month. This is an ideal application for an internal static array. month_name contains a private array of character strings, and returns a pointer to the proper one when called. This section shows how that array of names is initialized.

The syntax is similar to previous initializations:

```
/* month_name: return name of n-th month */

char *month_name(int n)

{
static char *name[] = {
	"Illegal month",
	"January", "February", "March",
	"April", "May", "June",
	"July", "August", "September",
	"October", "November", "December"
};
	return (n < 1 || n > 12) ? name[0] : name[n];
}
```

The declaration of name, which is an array of character pointers, is the same as lineptr in the sorting example. The initializer is a list of character strings; each is assigned to the corresponding position in the array. The characters of the i-th string are placed somewhere, and a pointer to them is stored in name[i]. Since the size of the array name is not specified, the compiler counts the initializers and fills in the correct number.

5.9 Pointers vs. Multi-dimensional Arrays

Newcomers to C are sometimes confused about the difference between a two-dimensional array and an array of pointers, such as name in the example above. Given the definitions

int a[10][20];

int *b[10];

then a[3][4] and b[3][4] are both syntactically legal references to a single int. But a is a true two-dimensional array: 200 int-sized locations have been set aside, and the conventional rectangular subscript calculation 20 * row +col is used to find the element a[row,col]. For b, however, the definition only allocates 10 pointers and does not initialize them; initialization must be done explicitly, either statically or with code. Assuming that each element of b does point to a twenty-element array, then there will be 200 ints set aside, plus ten cells for the pointers. The important advantage of the pointer array is that the rows of the array may be of different lengths. That is, each element of b need not point to a twenty-element vector; some may point to two elements, some to fifty, and some to none at all.

Although we have phrased this discussion in terms of integers, by far the most frequent use of arrays of pointers is to store character strings of diverse lengths, as in the function month_name. Compare the declaration and picture for an array of pointers:

char *name[] = { "Illegal month", "Jan", "Feb", "Mar" };

with those for a two-dimensional array:

char aname[][15] = { "Illegal month", "Jan", "Feb", "Mar" };

Exercise 5-9. Rewrite the routines day_of_year and month_day with pointers instead of indexing.





