## 2.4 Declarations

All variables must be declared before use, although certain declarations can be made implicitly by content. A declaration specifies a type, and contains a list of one or more variables of that type, as in

```
int lower, upper, step;
char c, line[1000];
```

Variables can be distributed among declarations in any fashion; the lists above could well be written as

```
	int lower;
	int upper;
	int step;
	char c;
	char line[1000];
```

The latter form takes more space, but is convenient for adding a comment to each declaration for subsequent modifications.

A variable may also be initialized in its declaration. If the name is followed by an equals sign and an expression, the expression serves as an initializer, as in

```
	char esc = '\\';
	int i = 0;
	int limit = MAXLINE+1;
	float eps = 1.0e-5;
```

If the variable in question is not automatic, the initialization is done once only, conceptionally before the program starts executing, and the initializer must be a constant expression. An explicitly initialized automatic variable is initialized each time the function or block it is in is entered; the initializer may be any expression. External and static variables are initialized to zero by default. Automatic variables for which is no explicit initializer have undefined (i.e., garbage) values.

The qualifier const can be applied to the declaration of any variable to specify that its value will not be changed. For an array, the const qualifier says that the elements will not be altered.

```
	const double e = 2.71828182845905;
	const char msg[] = "warning: ";
```

The const declaration can also be used with array arguments, to indicate that the function does not change that array:

```
	int strlen(const char[]);
```

The result is implementation-defined if an attempt is made to change a const.

## 2.5 Arithmetic Operators

The binary arithmetic operators are +,-, *, /, and the modulus operator %. Integer division truncates any fractional part. The expression

```
	x % y
```

produces the remainder when x is divided by y, and thus is zero when y divides x exactly. For example, a year is a leap year if it is divisible by 4 but not by 100, except that years divisible by 400 are leap years. Therefore

```
if ((year % 4 == 0 && year % 100 != 0) || year % 400 == 0)
		printf("%d is a leap year\n", year);
else
		printf("%d is not a leap year\n", year);
```

The % operator cannot be applied to a float or double. The direction of truncation for / and the sign of the result for % are machine-dependent for negative operands, as is the action taken on overflow or underflow.

The binary + and-operators have the same precedence, which is lower than the precedence of *, / and %, which is in turn lower than unary + and-. Arithmetic operators associate left to right.

Table 2.1 at the end of this chapter summarizes precedence and associativity for all operators.

## 2.6 Relational and Logical Operators

The relational operators are

```
> >= < <=
```

They all have the same precedence. Just below them in precedence are the equality operators:

```
== !=
```

Relational operators have lower precedence than arithmetic operators, so an expression like i < lim-1 is taken as i < (lim-1), as would be expected.

More interesting are the logical operators && and ||. Expressions connected by && or || are evaluated left to right, and evaluation stops as soon as the truth or falsehood of the result is known. Most C programs rely on these properties. For example, here is a loop from the input function getline that we wrote in Chapter 1:

```
for (i=0; i < lim-1 && (c=getchar()) != '\n' && c != EOF; ++i)

s[i] = c;
```

Before reading a new character it is necessary to check that there is room to store it in the array s, so the test i < lim-1 must be made first. Moreover, if this test fails, we must not go on and read another character.

Similarly, it would be unfortunate if c were tested against EOF before getchar is called; therefore the call and assignment must occur before the character in c is tested.

The precedence of && is higher than that of ||, and both are lower than relational and equality operators, so expressions like

```
i < lim-1 && (c=getchar()) != '\n' && c != EOF 
```

need no extra parentheses. But since the precedence of != is higher than assignment, parentheses are needed in

```
(c=getchar()) != '\n'
```

to achieve the desired result of assignment to c and then comparison with '\n'.

By definition, the numeric value of a relational or logical expression is 1 if the relation is true, and 0 if the relation is false.

The unary negation operator ! converts a non-zero operand into 0, and a zero operand in 1. A common use of ! is in constructions like

```
if (!valid)
```

rather than

```
if (valid == 0)
```

It's hard to generalize about which form is better. Constructions like !valid read nicely (``if not valid''), but more complicated ones can be hard to understand.

Exercise 2-2. Write a loop equivalent to the for loop above without using && or ||.