## 2.9 Bitwise Operators

C provides six operators for bit manipulation; these may only be applied to integral operands, that is, char, short, int, and long, whether signed or unsigned.

					&  bitwise AND

					| bitwise inclusive OR

					^ bitwise exclusive OR

					<< left shift

                    >> right shift

					~ one's complement (unary)

The bitwise AND operator & is often used to mask off some set of bits, for example

```
n = n & 0177;
```

sets to zero all but the low-order 7 bits of n.

The bitwise OR operator | is used to turn bits on:

```
x = x | SET_ON;
```

sets to one in x the bits that are set to one in SET_ON.

The bitwise exclusive OR operator ^ sets a one in each bit position where its operands have different bits, and zero where they are the same.

One must distinguish the bitwise operators & and | from the logical operators && and ||, which imply left-to-right evaluation of a truth value. For example, if x is 1 and y is 2, then x & y is zero while x && y is one.

The shift operators << and >> perform left and right shifts of their left operand by the number of bit positions given by the right operand, which must be non-negative. Thus x << 2 shifts

the value of x by two positions, filling vacated bits with zero; this is equivalent to multiplication by 4. Right shifting an unsigned quantity always fits the vacated bits with zero. Right shifting a signed quantity will fill with bit signs (``arithmetic shift'') on some machines and with 0-bits (``logical shift'') on others.

The unary operator ~ yields the one's complement of an integer; that is, it converts each 1-bit into a 0-bit and vice versa. For example

```
x = x & ~077
```

sets the last six bits of x to zero. Note that x & ~077 is independent of word length, and is thus preferable to, for example, x & 0177700, which assumes that x is a 16-bit quantity. The portable form involves no extra cost, since ~077 is a constant expression that can be evaluated at compile time.

As an illustration of some of the bit operators, consider the function getbits(x,p,n) that returns the (right adjusted) n-bit field of x that begins at position p. We assume that bit position 0 is at the right end and that n and p are sensible positive values. For example, getbits(x,4,3) returns the three bits in positions 4, 3 and 2, right-adjusted.


```
/* getbits: get n bits from position p */

unsigned getbits(unsigned x, int p, int n)

{

return (x >> (p+1-n)) & ~(~0 << n);

}
```

The expression x >> (p+1-n) moves the desired field to the right end of the word. ~0 is all 1-bits; shifting it left n positions with ~0< places zeros in the rightmost n bits; complementing that with ~ makes a mask with ones in the rightmost n bits.

Exercise 2-6. Write a function setbits(x,p,n,y) that returns x with the n bits that begin at position p set to the rightmost n bits of y, leaving the other bits unchanged.

Exercise 2-7. Write a function invert(x,p,n) that returns x with the n bits that begin at position p inverted (i.e., 1 changed into 0 and vice versa), leaving the others unchanged.

Exercise 2-8. Write a function rightrot(x,n) that returns the value of the integer x rotated to the right by n positions.

## 2.10 Assignment Operators and Expressions

An expression such as

```
i = i + 2
```

in which the variable on the left side is repeated immediately on the right, can be written in the compressed form

```
i += 2
```

The operator += is called an assignment operator.

Most binary operators (operators like + that have a left and right operand) have a corresponding assignment operator op=, where op is one of

	             +   -   *   /   %   <<   >>   &   ^   | 

If expr 1 and expr2 are expressions, then

```
expr1 op= expr2
```

is equivalent to

expr1 = (expr1) op (expr2)

except that expr1 is computed only once. Notice the parentheses around expr2:

```
x *= y + 1
```

means

```
x = x * (y + 1)
```

rather than

```
x = x * y + 1
```

As an example, the function bitcount counts the number of 1-bits in its integer argument.

```
/* bitcount: count 1 bits in x */
int bitcount(unsigned x)

{
int b;
for (b = 0; x != 0; x >>= 1)
	if (x & 01)
		b++;
	return b;
}
```

Declaring the argument x to be an unsigned ensures that when it is right-shifted, vacated bits will be filled with zeros, not sign bits, regardless of the machine the program is run on.

Quite apart from conciseness, assignment operators have the advantage that they correspond better to the way people think. We say ``add 2 to i'' or ``increment i by 2'', not ``take i, add 2, then put the result back in i''. Thus the expression i += 2 is preferable to i = i+2. In addition, for a complicated expression like

```
yyval[yypv[p3+p4] + yypv[p1]] += 2
```

the assignment operator makes the code easier to understand, since the reader doesn't have to check painstakingly that two long expressions are indeed the same, or to wonder why they're not. And an assignment operator may even help a compiler to produce efficient code.

We have already seen that the assignment statement has a value and can occur in expressions; the most common example is

```
while ((c = getchar()) != EOF)
	...
```

The other assignment operators (+=,-=, etc.) can also occur in expressions, although this is less frequent.

In all such expressions, the type of an assignment expression is the type of its left operand, and the value is the value after the assignment.

Exercise 2-9. In a two's complement number system, x &= (x-1) deletes the rightmost 1-bit in x. Explain why. Use this observation to write a faster version of bitcount.